So Joseph also went up from the town of Nazareth in Galilee to Judea to Bethlehem, the town of David, because he belonged to the house and the line of David.
He went there to register with Mary, who was pledged to be married to him and was expecting a child.
While they were there, the time came for the baby to be born, and she gave birth to her firstborn, a son.
She wrapped him in cloths and placed him in a manger because there was no guest room available for them.
This is the word of the Lord.
Merry Christmas family.
It's great to be with you all.
I just promised my own children, so I want to make this promised public to all children in the room.
I'll do my best to make this quick, and I'll let you play with fire at the end.
Okay?
Just hang on.
Christmas is one of those marked occasions that pulls memory to the surface for us.
Good memories and bad memories.
For better and for worse, we just seem to recall the events of the last days of December more readily than we do most intervals of our lives.
For instance, every Christmas I remember the year that my aunt gifted me a remote control car, favorite toy I've ever had, and that very night I washed it with soap and water, just like I'd seen my dad wash his car, only for it to never work again.
I remember the first year I had a child at home, my first Christmas as a parent and the joy of getting to share in his joy.
I remember the COVID year when we stayed isolated from family and still all of us got sick.
And I remember a couple of Christmases ago amid a personal cancer battle that was just beginning.
It was in those winter months that I got a call from Ramon, an old friend of mine from New York that I hadn't heard from in months.
And I picked up
and the elevator lobby of my oncologist's office.
Tyler, he sounded frantic on the other end and I went ahead and boarded the elevator trying not to be rude to the other passengers while listening to Ramon as the phone cut in and out struggling for connection.
I couldn't hang up though because Ramon was obviously scared.
He sounded desperate.
He was recounting to me a habit of self-harm that had gotten so bad that he didn't trust himself.
And so I stood talking with him outside the oncologist's office on the fifth floor as Ramon explained his struggle to keep a grip on his life and the will to keep living it.
And he walked along Avenue D in New York City just off the East River in Lower Manhattan surrounded by people.
And yet so lost, so lonely, so alone.
Genesis chapter 15 serves as the culmination of God's call of Abraham when he walks him outside on a dark, clear night and says something along the lines of, look up at the stars.
Count all those up if you can.
I'm going to extend your family line to outnumber the cosmos.
And that was a particularly bold claim given the fact that Abe and his wife Sarah were old enough to wear dentures and use a CPAP machine when they sleep at night.
No offense, Dad, if you happen to be listening.
And on top of that, Sarah was barren and childless despite their best efforts not to get graphic with children present.
But the strangest, most surprising thing happened.
Abraham believed God.
Genesis 15.6, Abraham believes the Lord and he credited it to him as righteousness.
Now look, I know what you're probably thinking, what does any of this have to do with Christmas?
I thought we were here for a pep talk about the true reason for the season before we all get on with sugar and presents.
Well, when Matthew opened the New Testament with the Christmas story that we have come here to celebrate, his once upon a time sounds like this.
This is the genealogy of Jesus, the Messiah, the son of David, the son of Abraham.
So there he is again, Abraham.
Why does Christmas start with Abraham?
because God's promise to Abraham, and Abraham's belief is the beginning of this long, slow, divine play to redeem the human race, culminating in the birth of Jesus that we are here to celebrate.
And this unlikely promise and bewildering belief, it's not just the origin point of the Jesus story.
Actually, all three of the world's historic and popular religions, Judaism, Islam, and Christianity, trace their roots back to this silent holy night.
Every spirituality philosophy and worldview is just trying to answer three core questions.
Origin, conflict, and resolution.
Where do we come from and why are we here?
What's gone wrong and how is it made right?
And Christmas, in spite of what you may have heard, isn't actually about a clatter on a rooftop or a baby in a manger, not in isolation at least.
It's a profoundly personal answer to philosophy's great riddle.
Let me explain.
First origin.
Where do we come from and why are we here?
The biblical book of Genesis emerged within an ancient Near Eastern world that had a number of different creation myths circulating alongside it.
And every other one of those myths involves a battle and a pantheon of gods with one God killing and subduing the others.
And then that powerful victorious God creates.
The Genesis story is unique because it imagines God in the beginning in a harmonious community.
So every other story says that God at the core of his personality is power.
Genesis comes along and says no, no, no, God at the core of his personality is love.
And that means that the motive behind creation is not to exert power, but to share love.
It's a little bit more like a happily married couple saying that the love that we're sharing together is so good.
What if we could create another so that the love we share could be directed and even multiplied
as we direct it at that other.
Page one of the Bible is about perfect love, perfect love between God and people and perfect love between people and people.
Well, what's gone wrong then?
That brings us to the conflict.
I've got two categories of problems in my life.
Problems outside of me and problems inside of me.
The problems outside of me go by names like my post-holiday checking account, my uptight neighbor, and this looming trip to the DMV that I keep putting off.
Problems inside of me go by names like ego, anger, lack of empathy, and an obsessive preoccupation with my own comfort.
Every belief system assumes something is wrong with the world.
Buddhists believe that something is wrong within me.
Secular humanists believe that something is wrong beyond me.
That we are socially sick collectively and oppressive or oppressed individually.
Jesus says something is wrong with the world.
And that something is within you and me too.
You see, everyone's got two sets of problems, outside and inside problems.
And sin is the moniker, the Bible uses, to summarize those problems.
And sure, that's a word that's been abused by some, and it might even reek with emotional baggage to you.
So feel free to change out the terminology, but do not ignore the diagnosis.
Properly understood, sin is not an accusation or a condemnation, it's just an honest diagnosis.
It's a trip to the doctor where you describe all your symptoms and discover like, oh, there's a name for this disease I've got.
And the trouble with pretending that I'm healthy even if I've got all the symptoms is I miss out on the healing.
The most common sin symptoms are shame and loneliness.
Now, shame is different than guilt.
Guilt is about behavior.
Shame is about identity.
Guilt is, oh, I did something wrong.
Shame is, oh, something is wrong with me.
And as a society, we're growing more connected and more lonely at the same time.
The increasing number of social networks and notification services available allow us to maintain a loose connection with hundreds, if not thousands of acquaintances, but that constant connectivity is eroding true loving relationship.
Our relationships are increasingly broad but shallow.
Everyone.
is becoming a stranger and a crowd of strangers and the felt experience of loneliness is ironically magnified by the electronic crowd that we're always rubbing shoulders with.
Every one of us today is Ramon walking on Avenue D, placing one last ditch phone call, unable to heal ourselves and also ashamed that we haven't become who we've aimed to be.
surrounded by so many people, but also entirely alone, alive, but swimming through a sea of strangers.
See, everyone's got these two problems, outside and inside problems.
And that leaves the resolution.
So how is all of it made right?
The Jesus story is distinct from every other spirituality and philosophy in a number of different ways, but none is more stark than Christmas.
Only the Bible shows us a God who descends.
Only Jesus claims the world is made right by God coming to us rather than us finding our way back to God.
The poet George Herbert put it this way, the God of power as he did ride in his majestic robes of glory, reserved to light, and so one day he did descend on dressing all the way.
Or for those who prefer the more crass version, social activist, Dorothy Sayers said,
For whatever reason God chose to make man as he is, limited and suffering and subject to the sorrows of death, he had the honesty and courage to take his own medicine.
Whatever game he is playing with his creation, he has kept his own rules and played fair.
He can exact nothing from man that he has not exacted from himself.
He has himself gone through the whole of human experience from the trivial irritations of family life and cramping restrictions of hard work and lack of money to the worst horrors of pain and humiliation defeat despair and death.
When he was a man, he played the man.
He was born in poverty and died in disgrace and thought it all worthwhile.
You know, when I was young, I was taught a courtroom conception of God.
The father is the judge issuing eternal verdicts.
The serpent is the accuser, the prosecuting attorney.
And I'm the accused.
And the truth is I'm guilty.
But Jesus is the ultimate defense attorney.
And he is pleading my case and reversing that verdict.
Now that illustration works if what went wrong at the very beginning was at its core, moral and behavioral.
But a close reading of the Bible's core conflict reveals that the serpent tempting Eve and Genesis three never once asks her to eat the fruit.
There's no direct temptation toward behavior or a compromise in morality.
Instead, he chips away at her trust in God until that moral action is the natural product of a relational deception.
The serpent's deception is named squarely at love.
Where to find love, how to find love, who or what will love me, and even how we love each other.
Sin, then, is not the absence of love.
It's just the search for love in a place that I'm never gonna find it.
Every human being alive today is on a search to be loved and sin is the attempt to acquire love by some means under my control rather than receive it as the free gift of God who made me in his divine image.
I try to drum up my own loveliness somehow through my body, my resume, my accomplishments, status, calendar, possessions, social standing security, pick your identity over attachment and try to heal your shame and absolve your loneliness.
That's sin.
And because the serpent's deception is a distortion of love, a courtroom understanding of God might absolve me of moral wrong while keeping the core lie intact.
Because even if that courtroom God finds me innocent, I still imagine God to be a moral traffic cop whose primary identity is law enforcement.
And everyone gets stressed.
when a traffic cop pulls into the lane behind them on the highway, even if you're going five miles under wearing seven seat belts.
Because you know that the only reason for increased intimacy with that traffic cop is if the law needs to be enforced upon me.
And the same holds with the courtroom God.
The only reason for more personal interaction with that God is if the law needs to be enforced upon me.
Now look, are there moral and behavioral expressions of human brokenness?
Absolutely.
But all moral and behavioral sin is rooted in a relational deception about love, about who offers it, how I get it, and how I keep it.
God came as a person because the core conflict of human history is about love, and love is personal, or it's not love at all.
Right, the man who loves women in general
It's called a womanizer or a playboy.
The man who loves a woman in her youth, her middle age, and her elderly frailty, he is called faithful.
It's easy to say, I love sub-Saharan Africa from a cozy multi-story home in the American suburbs.
But the true test of love comes when it gets personal.
I love Omari and Zaire.
I love Nia and Asha.
I've been in their home.
I've broken bread at their table.
I've lived in their shoes.
Do you see what I'm getting at here?
To be loved by God generally and distantly is not love at all.
Love is personal or it's something else.
Love is a God with the courage to take his own medicine.
Love is a God who did descend on dressing all the way.
The provocative claim that we have come to gather around on Christmas Eve is that God has undressed himself of all transcendent glory.
He has stripped himself of every last power except for one, the power to love and be loved, which is to borrow a line from Frederick Beekner of all powers, most powerful because only love can conquer the human heart.
And that is a wonder at which some fall to their knees before.
and it is a scandal to shake their heads at in dismiss.
But whatever your reaction, there you have it, an origin, a conflict, and a resolution.
I've just offered you a set of facts that I think it's worth thinking really hard about.
And I think you should think really hard about these questions and your answers to them.
I think you owe it to yourself to dignify your life by wrestling with the very questions that your existence provokes.
I don't think that doubt or belief should be blind.
The characters on the pages of the Gospels don't believe blindly.
They wrestle with the claims.
They ask hard questions.
They come to their conclusions by engaging their intellect.
And you should do the same.
These days, people talk a whole lot about believing in God.
As if God is a hypothesis some are willing to accept.
Or as if a God powerful enough to create all I know and experience, including me, is also insecure enough to worry about my thoughts on his existence.
Belief for Abraham was a whole lot more substantive than that.
And now we are back where we started.
Abraham believed the Lord and he credited it to him as righteousness.
Abraham believed in God's existence, sure, but that's not what God equated with righteousness, which is a one word summary for the repair of what went wrong in the beginning.
It means right relationship with God and right relationship with people.
Abraham believed God and that's a lot more personal than believing in God.
It means Abraham took God in his word when he looked up at the stars and he heard that whisper in the depth of his being and God was saying to him somewhere in the deepest part of his soul, you're greatest and most long lasting pain, old man.
I can heal that.
You're greatest source of shame.
I can wash it clean.
Your truest desire.
I can fill it.
The arrival of Jesus, Emmanuel God with us, is a profound statement that the healing of the human soul requires more than a doctrinal statement.
But a person of love, restoring the love we lost at the very beginning, he became like us so that we could remember and recover who he made us at first, perfectly loved and perfectly loving, just like him.
If you think Jesus's invitation is mainly a set of morals to live by or a creed to affirm, then sure, believe in God.
Because according to that view, God took on flesh and lived among us so they could get something from us.
But if you take Jesus seriously, if you are awoken by the wonder of Christmas, you know that Jesus's invitation was so much better, so much more joyful, so much more personal than that.
God took on flesh.
in Jesus, not to get something from us, but to give something to us.
And that's life and life to the full.
To believe in God makes me the actor exercising agency.
I ascend to my belief to believe God makes God the actor exercising agency and leaves me as the recipient responding to a gift.
Belief is personal.
And that makes it less about preferring Jesus's hypothesis to the other options and more about love.
The love that made the world first remakes it now and even remakes me here tonight.
Belief requires some crack within me where love can get in.
Jesus himself grew up and showed us how to let love in when he willfully submitted himself to baptism.
And when he emerged from the waters in Luke three, the voice of God himself broke out.
You are my son, whom I love.
With you I am well pleased.
So after that phone call outside my oncologist office, Ramon moved in with me and my family.
And I got to watch for my front row seat as he struggled and fought for his life for the will and desire to live.
It was such a steep, arduous, painful climb.
And eventually he pieced things together enough to move out and get his own place and get established.
And about six months ago now, when he was 30 years old, he and I were taking a walk together.
The other day I was getting ready for work.
He started to explain to me and I was shaving.
And as I was looking at myself, just alone in my apartment in the bathroom mirror, something happened and he paused.
There was this catch in his throat and tears began to well behind his eyes.
A thought crossed my mind as I looked at my reflection.
You're a good looking dude.
But when he said it, tears were streaming down his cheeks.
His lips were trembling and he struggled through emotion to get the rest out.
And I realized that I've never in my life thought about myself like that before.
I've never liked my own reflection.
I've never liked myself.
And you know what Tyler?
What buddy?
I know it wasn't me who put that thought in my head.
Because the truth is, I look a lot like I've always looked.
I wasn't seeing a new reflection in the mirror.
It was God who put that thought in my mind.
And I was finally for the first time seeing myself like he sees me and I loved it.
I mean I loved me because he loves me.
Ramon realized he wasn't alone.
And so he wasn't ashamed and he wasn't lost and he wasn't lonely.
Ramon realized he wanted to live, that he had an origin, a conflict and resolution that made all the good in his life worth savoring and all the bad worth facing.
He realized that he had not found home, but that home had found him.
He was just shaving, just getting ready for work one morning like any other morning when the whisper we call Christmas said something to him that sounded a lot like, you are my son.
whom I love with you, I'm well pleased.
Belief requires some crack within me where love can get in.
And I just wonder if that might be happening to a person or two right now.
If there's some crack within you where love is able to get in.
And if it is, you should know that you can push that away if you want.
Sentiment or cynicism is every bit as on the table as love.
But then you'd walk out of this place just like you came in, swimming through a sea of strangers, surrounded, but alone.
Or I guess you could walk out just the same in the eyes of everybody else, only within you you would finally be home.
because the life of Jesus in the celebration of Christmas is God's most personal declaration that He won't wait for you to come home.
Home is what He has brought to you.
Let's stand and we'll pray together.
Thanks for joining the Bridgetown family as we engage in this teaching series.
To learn more about the life of our church and how you can get involved,
Visit Bridgetown.church slash welcome.
If you're interested in contributing financially to Bridgetown Church and to our ministry, you can do that at Bridgetown.church slash giving.
Wherever you're joining us from, we hope this resource blesses you and encourages you to be with Jesus, become like Jesus, and do what Jesus did.